# Supplements for Letters from the Stochastic Penal Colony ðŸ

This directory contains the following supplements to the paper:

  * The [data](data) directory contains transparency data released by Meta and
    NCMEC as well as datasets capturing names, regions, continents, and
    population counts for most of Earth's countries curated by myself.
  * The [analysis.ipynb] notebook runs the [meta.ipynb](meta.ipynb),
    [tiktok.ipynb](tiktok.ipynb) and
    [csam-across-world.ipynb](csam-across-world.ipynb) notebooks with the
    corresponding analysis code. The required Python packages are listed in
    [requirements.txt](requirements.txt). However, instead of manually setting
    up the corresponding virtual environment, just run

    > ./build.sh venv

    in the repository root to create and/or activate a virtual environment
    suitable for running either notebook. The notebooks are open source under
    the Apache 2.0 license.
  * The [figures](figures) directory contains SVG graphics generated by the
    `csam-across-world.ipynb` notebook.
  * [emoji.md](emoji.md) describes my setup for using color emoji with pdflatex.
    It relies on the [fix-page-groups.py](fix-page-groups.py) script.
  * The [prompts](prompts) directory contains all my DALL-E 2 prompts and a
    short script for collecting statistics.
  * The [best-of-generations](best-of-generations) contains my selection of
    images that violate DALL-E 2's content policy while also being visually
    compelling.
  * The `extra-generations` directory contains unedited DALL-EÂ 2 prompts and
    generations that inadvertently include grotesquely racist imagery. See
    `README.md` in the directory for more details.

All critical source material for the paper's analysis is reproduced in
appendices of the paper.
